diffusiongemma (#3416)
huggingface/blog: gemma4.md

Find the checkpoints in the [Gemma 4 collection](https://huggingface.co/collections/google/gemma-4) and the [mlx-community collection](https://huggingface.co/collections/mlx-community/gemma-4-assistant-mtp).

## DiffusionGemma: Text Generation via Diffusion

Alongside the autoregressive Gemma 4 family, Google DeepMind is releasing [**DiffusionGemma**](https://huggingface.co/google/diffusiongemma-26B-A4B-it), a multimodal model that generates text using **discrete diffusion** instead of token-by-token autoregression. It's built on the same 26B A4B Mixture-of-Experts foundation (25.2B total / 3.8B active parameters, 8 active experts out of 128 plus 1 shared), takes text and image inputs, generates text, and supports up to 256K context — all under the same Apache 2.0 license.

> Where a standard causal LM emits one token at a time, DiffusionGemma denoises whole blocks of tokens in parallel. The architecture is encoder-decoder: an autoregressive encoder prefills the prompt and builds the KV cache, while a decoder applies **bidirectional attention** over a "canvas" of 256 tokens. During **multi-canvas sampling**, the model iteratively denoises a full canvas with a diffusion sampler; once a canvas is finalized it's encoded and appended to the KV cache, then the next canvas begins. This block-autoregressive approach is what unlocks the speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where a standard causal LM emits one token at a time, DiffusionGemma denoises whole blocks of tokens in parallel. The architecture is encoder-decoder: an autoregressive encoder prefills the prompt and builds the KV cache, while a decoder applies **bidirectional attention** over a "canvas" of 256 tokens. During **multi-canvas sampling**, the model iteratively denoises a full canvas with a diffusion sampler; once a canvas is finalized it's encoded and appended to the KV cache, then the next canvas begins. This block-autoregressive approach increases generation speed.
```

The headline benefit is **throughput**: parallel denoising generates roughly 15–20 tokens per forward pass, reaching per-user generation speeds **exceeding 1100 tokens/second** at low batch sizes (H100, FP8). Inference compute is adaptive too — simpler prompts and structured tasks like code need fewer denoising steps, so tokens-per-second scales with task complexity. It keeps the broader Gemma 4 toolkit: thinking mode, function calling, long context, native system prompts, and image understanding (OCR, document parsing, object detection, pointing) at variable aspect ratios and resolutions.

> Benchmarks show the expected trade-off — DiffusionGemma trails the autoregressive 26B A4B on most tasks (e.g. MMLU Pro 77.6% vs 82.6%, AIME 2026 69.1% vs 88.3%, GPQA Diamond 73.2% vs 82.3%) in exchange for its large speed advantage, while edging ahead on a few (HLE no tools 11.0% vs 8.7%).

Reviewer: why is the trade-off expected?

> Benchmarks show the expected trade-off — DiffusionGemma trails the autoregressive 26B A4B on most tasks (e.g. MMLU Pro 77.6% vs 82.6%, AIME 2026 69.1% vs 88.3%, GPQA Diamond 73.2% vs 82.3%) in exchange for its large speed advantage, while edging ahead on a few (HLE no tools 11.0% vs 8.7%).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Benchmarks show an expected trade-off between speed and evaluation metrics — DiffusionGemma trails the autoregressive 26B A4B on most tasks (e.g. MMLU Pro 77.6% vs 82.6%, AIME 2026 69.1% vs 88.3%, GPQA Diamond 73.2% vs 82.3%) in exchange for its large speed advantage, while edging ahead on a few (HLE no tools 11.0% vs 8.7%).
```

Getting started looks just like the rest of Gemma 4, via the dedicated diffusion class:

```python
from transformers import DiffusionGemmaForBlockDiffusion, AutoProcessor

MODEL_ID = "google/diffusiongemma-26B-A4B-it"

processor = AutoProcessor.from_pretrained(MODEL_ID)
model = DiffusionGemmaForBlockDiffusion.from_pretrained(
    MODEL_ID,
    dtype="auto",
    device_map="auto",
)

message = [{"role": "user", "content": "Why is the sky blue?"}]
input_ids = processor.apply_chat_template(
    message,
    tokenize=True,
    add_generation_prompt=True,
    return_dict=True,
    return_tensors="pt",
).to(model.device)
output = model.generate(**input_ids, max_new_tokens=512)
text = processor.decode(output[0], skip_special_tokens=False)
```

> For best results, Google recommends the **Entropy-Bounded (EB) sampler** with adaptive stopping (up to 48 denoising steps, a temperature schedule decaying from 0.8 → 0.4, and an entropy bound of 0.1 for token selection). As with Gemma 4, place image content **before** text in your prompt, and toggle reasoning with the `<|think|>` control token.

Reviewer: We should perhaps explain how to configure these parameters (they don't appear in the example), but we can iterate.
